---
title: Adobe's New TOS
---
## Background
Terms of service (TOS) are the legal agreements between a service provider and a prospective user of said service. The prospective user, upon agreeing to the terms, enters a legally binding relationship with the provider. But as we're all aware, few people actually read the TOS before clicking *accept*. Few are willing to dedicate the time to carefully read and understand the lengthy, nauseating, but mostly inconsequential legal jargon. I am certainly guilty of this.

The service provider has sole authorship over the TOS. As such, they can (and will) often sneak some suspicious terms, obfuscated by lengthy sentences and complex vocabulary, into the agreement without sounding any alarms. Services like [Terms of Service; Didn't Read](https://tosdr.org) (TOS;DR) and [TOSBack](https://tosback.org/) exist for the sole purpose of elucidating these challenging agreements. 
## Adobe's TOS
*Note: [TOS;DR has assigned Adobe](https://tosdr.org/en/service/417) a grade of E (their lowest grade).*

Recent changes to [Adobe's Terms of Service](https://www.adobe.com/legal/terms.html) have sparked outrage over their suspicious terms. The TL;DR is that Adobe claims a number of rights over the works you create with any of their services, **effectively stripping you of your control over your intellectual property***. 

Adobe has a dubious history [1](https://www.techradar.com/news/adobe-is-almost-definitely-using-your-content-to-train-ai) [2](https://techcrunch.com/2023/01/06/is-adobe-using-your-photos-to-train-its-ai-its-complicated/) [3](https://x.com/Stretchedwiener/status/1799093882619347262) with how it exercises its supposed rights to user's work. Hence, users already have little reason to trust the company.

Adobe has [responded](https://blog.adobe.com/en/publish/2024/06/06/clarification-adobe-terms-of-use) to public outcry with a blog post clarifying the new terms, but the post itself has raised more questions than it answered. Some of these questions will be discussed below.

At the time of writing (June, 9th, 2024), Adobe's TOS contain the following (troublesome) clauses:
### Privacy
> 2.2 **Our Access to Your Content.** We may access, view, or listen to your Content (defined in section 4.1 (Content) below) through both automated and manual methods, but only in limited ways, and only as permitted by law. For example, in order to provide the Services and Software, we may need to access, view, or listen to your Content to (A) respond to Feedback or support requests; (B) detect, prevent, or otherwise address fraud, security, legal, or technical issues; and (C) enforce the Terms, as further set forth in Section 4.1 below. Our automated systems may analyze your Content and Creative Cloud Customer Fonts (defined in section 3.10 (Creative Cloud Customer Fonts) below) using techniques such as machine learning in order to improve our Services and Software and the user experience. \[...\]

*Translation: "We can snoop through your files and do with them as we please."*

Before proceeding any further, I would like to make one important note: Adobe has adopted out-out policies for data collection, storage, and analysis. This means, by default, a user's personal information and content is collected, stored on Adobe's servers, and may be analyzed at any time. This will continue until the user explicitly opts out. For example, Adobe spokespeople suggest (according to [1](https://www.techradar.com/news/adobe-is-almost-definitely-using-your-content-to-train-ai)) that users should adjust their privacy preferences and settings to prevent their content from being used to train machine learning (ML) models. 

By "manual methods", Adobe implies that human operators can access a user's content. Many professionals have [raised concerns](https://9to5mac.com/2024/06/06/change-to-adobe-terms-amp-conditions/) over this practice as it would violate non-disclosure agreements (NDA). Even if Adobe only accesses this content "in limited ways" and as "permitted by law", it necessarily discloses the content that is bound by NDAs. Furthermore, "as permitted by law" does **not** mean "to comply with law-enforcement", but rather, "in accordance with the TOS"; however, as we will see, these terms are powerful, which implies Adobe can access this content arbitrarily. Another interesting condition is that Adobe may invoke their right to manually access a user's content to "enforce the Terms". Since Adobe is the author of said "Terms", this statement can mean anything Adobe wants it to mean. 

Adobe does not appear to have addressed or denied this concern thus far. 
### Your Content
> 4.1 **Content.** “**Content**” means any text, information, communication, or material, such as audio files, video files, electronic documents, or images, that you upload, import into, embed for use by, or create using the Services and Software. We reserve the right (but do not have the obligation) to remove Content or restrict access to Content, Services, and Software if any of your Content is found to be in violation of the Terms. We do not review all Content uploaded to the Services and Software, but we may use available technologies, vendors, or processes, including manual review, to screen for certain types of illegal content (for example, child sexual abuse material) or other abusive content or behavior (for example, patterns of activity that indicate spam or phishing, or keywords that indicate adult content has been posted outside of the adult wall). \[...\]

*Translation: We may review and analyze your data for a number of reasons.*

Recall that Adobe uses an opt-out policy, so a lot of "Content" is provided to the company by default. Here and in the (not so) clarifying blog post, vague wording is used to describe when Adobe may invoke the right to review your content. As an example, both here and in the blog post, Adobe mentions that it may invoke this right to screen for child sexual abuse material (CSAM) or other illegal activities. The very mention of CSAM is enough to make most people's blood boil (myself included), so the fact that these review processes counteract such material is highly persuasive. However, and this is purely speculation, this sounds like the same justification that the NSA and numerous other government agencies worldwide have used to justify illegally spying on their citizens. Consider this: it is highly likely that those who engage in or produce CSAM are aware that what they are doing is both immoral and illegal, and will thus take sufficient steps to hide any trace of their actions, such as by opting-out of Adobe's cloud storage. Therefore, the content that Adobe is more likely to be analyzing, reviewing, and potentially using to train their ML models originates from the ordinary creator or professional. That being said, if there is even a small chance of catching those who engage in CSAM through this review process, it has proved its value. The problem, as we will see in the subsequent clause, is what Adobe can do with the content it collects. But before we move on, I want to reiterate the important point of *this* clause: Adobe provides an example of a condition under which it can/will review a user's content, but it does not provide an exhaustive list. There is some ambiguity that opens the door to unwanted wiggle room. 

> 4.2 **Licenses to Your Content.** Solely for the purposes of operating or improving the Services and Software, you grant us a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free sublicensable, license, to use, reproduce, publicly display, distribute, modify, create derivative works based on, publicly perform, and translate the Content. For example, we may sublicense our right to the Content to our service providers or to other users to allow the Services and Software to operate as intended, such as enabling you to share photos with others. \[...\]

*Translation: "We can and will do whatever we want with your creations, and there's nothing you can do about it."*

The license granted to Adobe by use of their services is a powerful one. **By using Adobe software, you lose your exclusive control over *your* intellectual property**. As stated above, this license essentially gives Adobe the right to do whatever it pleases with your content. 

The rights granted by this license resemble those of the [GNU General Public License (GPL)](https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl-3.0.en.html), a very liberal license often used in open-source software projects. There is, however, a stark contrast between how each of these licenses are granted. In the case of the GPL license, a software author *explicitly* grants the GPL license to end-users. Meanwhile, creatives or professionals that use Adobe products *implicitly* grant Adobe's license to the corporation itself (it is assumed, after all, that the user fully read and understood the TOS). 

In particular, this license grants Adobe the right to *sublicense* your content. That is, it not only receives a permissive license to do whatever it pleases with your content, it can also pass this license on to others. The following passage of Adobe's blog post in response to the controversy thus takes a new meaning:

> **Adobe does not train Firefly Gen AI models on customer content.** Firefly generative AI models are trained on a dataset of licensed content, such as Adobe Stock, and public domain content where copyright has expired. Read more here: [https://helpx.adobe.com/firefly/faq.html#training-data](https://helpx.adobe.com/firefly/faq.html#training-data)

Adobe is awfully specific that it will not train customer content on *their* AI (Firefly Gen AI) models, but who is to say that it won't sell that customer content to be trained on *other* AI models? Adobe has already been [sued for selling customer's personal data](https://petapixel.com/2023/12/14/adobe-sued-by-watchdog-over-mass-data-collection-of-dutch-citizens/). And you probably didn't know that outside of the creative software industry, Adobe makes [marketing tools](https://business.adobe.com/products/real-time-customer-data-platform/rtcdp.html) that revolve around selling customer data. Given this knowledge and Adobe's new terms to obtain a *royalty-free sublicensable license* for your content, the mention of *only* Firefly Gen AI is highly suspicious. 
### Dispute Resolution, Class Action Waiver, Arbitration Agreement
> 14.2 **No Class Actions. You may only resolve disputes with us on an individual basis, and you may not bring a claim as a plaintiff or a class member in a class, consolidated, or representative action. Nonetheless, if any portion of this class action waiver is deemed unenforceable or invalid as to a particular remedy, then that remedy (and only that remedy) must be severed from the arbitration and may be sought in court. The parties agree, however, that any adjudication of remedies not subject to arbitration shall be stayed pending the outcome of any arbitrable claims and remedies.**

*Translation: We are aware of the widespread harm our practices may cause, but absolve ourselves of all accountability.*

I find this clause rather odd; it's like saying "I cannot be held accountable for what I'm about to do", \*then proceeds to do something bad\* (or vice versa). 

My question to the scholars and lawyers present: is this even legally binding? 
### Other Implications
Adobe's blog post closes like so: 

> We will be clarifying the Terms of Use acceptance customers see when opening applications.

This "Terms of Use acceptance" refers to the summary of TOS changes that are presented to users before they can continue using a service. Note, however, Adobe does not say it will update the TOS itself; no, only just the summary. Rather than address the suspicious terms inserted into the TOS, Adobe will merely soften the language that describes those changes, effectively sweeping the mess under the rug. I think this is unacceptable. The terms are problematic, not for their language, but for their implications. 

Yes, as discussed earlier, the terms can be used for good, but they can certainly also be used for bad. These powerful terms give Adobe, a company whose objective is to maximize profits, the means to obtain and profit from creators and professionals' intellectual property. You cannot expect a company to do what's best for the customer (as we have seen time and time again), but you can certainly expect them to do what's best for business. Even if Adobe says it will do good, if the TOS gives it any capacity to do bad, you must expect that it will do so. These terms harm creators, professionals, and hobbyists alike, who should all have control over their content. 
## My $0.02
### Adobe Products Are Malware
For supposedly legitimate software, Adobe's products function an awful lot like malware. [Others seem to agree](https://community.adobe.com/t5/creative-cloud-services-discussions/how-do-we-remove-this-malware-virus-called-quot-creative-cloud-quot/td-p/12232204).Creative Cloud (which facilitates the monitoring of other Adobe software on your device) is installed alongside any of Adobe's creative software products unprompted and runs itself. This is literally a Trojan.
#### As Spyware
As mentioned numerous times previously, Adobe collects user information and content (usually without the user's knowledge) and exfiltrates the data to its servers. By all standard definitions of the term, this is precisely spyware. Adobe is not alone, however, since this practice has become so normalized that we have all forgotten what spyware really is.
#### As Ransomware
Adobe has been storing user's data and content long before the new terms came into effect. The terms suggest that Adobe would obtain licenses to *all* material it has collected. Some users reported that they were [unable to contact support](https://x.com/SamSantala/status/1798294125013516443) or [*uninstall* Adobe software](https://x.com/SamSantala/status/1798298024546124202) until they had agreed to the new terms. Effectively, *Adobe holds your intellectual property for ransom*. The ransom, here, being a non-exclusive, worldwide, royalty-free sublicensable, license, to use, reproduce, publicly display, distribute, modify, create derivative works based on, publicly perform, and translate the intellectual property in question. 
### Adobe Is Justifying Piracy
Have you ever heard the phrase: "you'll own nothing and you'll be happy"? Service providers appear to have taken this phrase to heart: software is no longer a one-time payment, it's now subscription-based; your data is no longer yours, but to be used for marketing purposes. These measures were introduced to reduce the cost of the product to the consumer, but with repeated price increases and reduced privacy and autonomy, what benefit is there to the consumer? If a user is already paying for a service, why should that service have any right to squeeze a little bit more out of them? **Why should the creator not have sole ownership over their creations?** And under these circumstances, what incentive is there for the consumer to support the company instead of pirating that software? With a pirated copy of the software, the consumer could disable all of its networking capabilities, thereby preventing their personal information and content from being disseminated to a third (and potentially fourth and so on) party. This also ensures that their intellectual property is protected. A legitimate copy of the software, however, could prevent you from disabling these capabilities. It is, after all, in the business's best interest that you keep providing them with valuable data. Therefore, I believe these practices encourage piracy (that is, if the consumer chooses to use this particular software instead of a free and/or open-source alternative). 
### Personal Experience / Closing Remarks
I have used Adobe products, such as Lightroom and Photoshop, for 5+ years. But recently (prior to the latest controversy), I have made the switch to free and open-source software (FOSS). This switch was not necessarily due to my contempt for Adobe as a company (though that does play a part); it was a natural progression for me, as a software developer, to support the projects that inspire me. FOSS may come with a learning curve, but the benefits are immense (especially considering the topics discussed above). The "free" part means *freedom*; FOSS won't grant itself a right to your creations. I have a whole post on FOSS, including **FOSS and free ($0) alternatives to Adobe software [[foss|here]]**. I hope you, too, will make the switch.
